Improve IPNS docs (#1258)
ipfs/ipfs-docs: docs/concepts/ipns.md

  - [How IPNS works](#how-ipns-works)
    - [Anatomy of an IPNS name](#anatomy-of-an-ipns-name)
      - [How IPNS names relate to CIDs](#how-ipns-names-relate-to-cids)
    - [IPNS names are self-certifying](#ipns-names-are-self-certifying)
    - [Common IPNS operations](#common-ipns-operations)
    - [IPNS is transport agnostic](#ipns-is-transport-agnostic)
      - [IPNS over the DHT](#ipns-over-the-dht)
      - [IPNS over PubSub](#ipns-over-pubsub)
        - [Publishing IPNS records over PubSub lifecycle](#publishing-ipns-records-over-pubsub-lifecycle)
    - [Tradeoffs between consistency vs. availability](#tradeoffs-between-consistency-vs-availability)
      - [IPNS record validity](#ipns-record-validity)
      - [Practical considerations](#practical-considerations)
  - [IPNS in practice](#ipns-in-practice)
    - [Resolving IPNS names using IPFS gateways](#resolving-ipns-names-using-ipfs-gateways)
  - [Publishing IPNS names with Kubo](#publishing-ipns-names-with-kubo)
  - [Example IPNS Setup with JS SDK API](#example-ipns-setup-with-js-sdk-api)
  - [Alternatives to IPNS](#alternatives-to-ipns)
  - [Further Resources](#further-resources)

## Mutability in IPFS

> [Content addressing](content-addressing.md) in IPFS is by nature _immutable_: when you add a file to IPFS, it creates a hash from the data contained in it. Changing a file changes its hash, and consequently its CID which is used as an address.

Reviewer: Can you connect the dots between hash and cid?

> Yet, there are many situations where **mutable pointers** are useful as a complement to immutability, for example, when publishing a website that frequently changes. It would be impractical to share a new CID every time you update the website. With mutable pointers, you can share the address of the pointer once, and update the pointer – to the new CID – every time you publish a change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yet, there are many situations where content-addressed data needs to be regularly updated, for example, when publishing a website that frequently changes. It would be impractical to share a new CID every time you update the website. With **mutable pointers**, you can share the address of the pointer once, and update the pointer – to the new CID – every time you publish a change.
```

> The InterPlanetary Name System (IPNS) enables the creation of such mutable pointers to CIDs known as **names** or **IPNS names**. IPNS names can be thought of as links that can be updated over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The InterPlanetary Name System (IPNS) is a system for creating such mutable pointers to CIDs known as **names** or **IPNS names**. IPNS names can be thought of as links that can be updated over time, while retaining the verifiability of content addressing.
```

> > **Note:** Technically, an IPNS name can also point to another IPNS name or DNSLink path. However, it most commonly points to a CID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Technically, an IPNS name can point to arbitrary content path (`/ipfs/` or `/ipns/`), including anoter IPNS name or DNSLink path. However, it most commonly points to fully resolved and immutable `/ipfs/CID`.
```

## How IPNS works

### Anatomy of an IPNS name

A **name** in IPNS is the [hash](hashing.md) of a public key. It is associated with an [**IPNS record**](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/IPNS.md#ipns-record) containing the content path (`/ipfs/CID`) it links to and other information such as the expiration, the version number, and a cryptographic signature signed by the corresponding private key. New records can be signed and published at any time by the holder of the private key.

For example, the following is an IPNS name represented by a CIDv1 of public key: [`k51qzi5uqu5dlvj2baxnqndepeb86cbk3ng7n3i46uzyxzyqj2xjonzllnv0v8`](https://cid.ipfs.tech/#k51qzi5uqu5dlvj2baxnqndepeb86cbk3ng7n3i46uzyxzyqj2xjonzllnv0v8).

> > **Note:** Kubo uses the identity private key (used for the PeerID) as the default IPNS name. But you can generate multiple keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:**  Kubo uses the `self` key (ed25519 private key used for the PeerID) as the default IPNS name. But you can generate multiple keys via [`ipfs key gen`](https://docs.ipfs.tech/reference/kubo/cli/#ipfs-key-gen), and use them for managing multiple IPNS names.
```

> #### How IPNS names relate to CIDs
> 
> A CIDv1 can be used to represent both:
> 
> - [Immutable content on IPFS](https://cid.ipfs.tech/#bafybeibml5uieyxa5tufngvg7fgwbkwvlsuntwbxgtskoqynbt7wlchmfm) (since the CID contains a multihash)
> - [IPNS name](https://cid.ipfs.tech/#k51qzi5uqu5dlvj2baxnqndepeb86cbk3ng7n3i46uzyxzyqj2xjonzllnv0v8) which corresponds to a libp2p public key.

Reviewer 2: I think talking about CIDs here is a bit confusing.  IPNS points at content **path**, so telling the story around a mutable and immutable namespace prefix makes it easier to reason about things:

```suggestion
#### How IPNS names relate to content paths

IPNS record can point at an immutable or a mutable path. The meaning behind CID used in a path depends on used  namespace:

- `/ipfs/<cid>` – an  [immutable content on IPFS](https://cid.ipfs.tech/#bafybeibml5uieyxa5tufngvg7fgwbkwvlsuntwbxgtskoqynbt7wlchmfm) (since the CID contains a multihash)
- `/ipns/<cid-of-libp2p-key>` – a cryptographic [IPNS name](https://cid.ipfs.tech/#k51qzi5uqu5dlvj2baxnqndepeb86cbk3ng7n3i46uzyxzyqj2xjonzllnv0v8) which corresponds to a libp2p public key.
```

The following is a useful mental model for understanding the difference between the two:

```
IPFS = immutable *Pointer => content
IPNS = **Pointer => content
```

IPNS names are essentially pointers (IPNS names) to pointers (IPFS CIDs) whereas IPFS CIDs are immutable (because they're derived from the content) pointers to content.

### IPNS names are self-certifying

IPNS names are self-certifying. This means that an IPNS record contains all the information necessary to certify its authenticity. IPNS achieves this using public and private key pairs:

- Each IPNS name corresponds to a key pair

> - The IPNS name is a hash of the public key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The IPNS name is a CID with a multihash of the public key
```

- The IPNS record contains the public key and signature, allowing anyone to verify that the record was signed by the private key holder.

This self-certifying nature gives IPNS several benefits not preset in hierarchical and consensus systems such as DNS, and blockchain identifiers. Notably, IPNS records can come from anywhere, not just a particular service/system, and it is very fast and easy to confirm a record is authentic.

### Common IPNS operations

As a user or developer using IPNS for naming, there are three common operations worth understanding:

- **Updating/Creating an IPNS record:** refers to the creation of an IPNS record and signing it with a private key.
- **Publishing an IPNS record:** advertising the IPNS record so that other nodes can resolve it. Details depend on the transport.
- **Resolving an IPNS name:** Resolving an IPNS name to a content path.

### IPNS is transport agnostic

> The self-certifying nature of IPNS records means that they are not tied to a specific transport protocol. In practice, most IPFS implementations rely on the [**DHT**](dht.md) and **PubSub** to publish and resolve IPNS records.

Reviewer 2: First time we mention Pubsub, good to link to official docs:
```suggestion
The self-certifying nature of IPNS records means that they are not tied to a specific transport protocol. In practice, most IPFS implementations rely on the [**DHT**](dht.md) and **[libp2p PubSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/)** to publish and resolve IPNS records.
```

There are nuanced differences and trade-offs between the **DHT** and **PubSub** to be aware of.

The main qualitative difference between the two is that IPNS over the DHT publishes and resolves to a global shared state, whereas IPNS over PubSub uses messaging over topics (where each IPNS name has a unique topic) to publish to and resolve from **interested peers**.

The main implication of this difference is that IPNS operations (publishing and resolving) over the DHT can take longer than over PubSub, while potentially ensuring higher consistency (you resolve to the latest version).

> > **Note:** This trade-off is best explained by [CAP theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem).

Reviewer 2: (feel free to ignore) I think we may want to use speciall callout blocks for notes like this, there is built-in support  documented at https://v1.vuepress.vuejs.org/guide/markdown.html#custom-containers

```suggestion
::: callout
This trade-off is best explained by [CAP theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem).
:::
```

Author: Generally, I agree though though the callout does make it a bit more prominent which in this specific case I think is unnecessary

#### IPNS over the DHT

> The DHT is the default transport mechanism for IPNS records in Kubo.

Reviewer: Maybe mention what some other Impls use, such as js-ipfs and Iroh?

> Due to the ephemeral nature of the DHT, records get dropped after 24 hours. This applies to any record in the DHT, irrespective of the `validity` (also referred to as `lifetime`) field in the IPNS record.

Reviewer 2: Useful to note this is behavior of other peers, outside our control.

```suggestion
Due to the ephemeral nature of the DHT, peers forget records after 24 hours. This applies to any record in the DHT, irrespective of the `validity` (also referred to as `lifetime`) field in the IPNS record.
```

> Therefore, IPNS records need to be regularly published to the DHT. Moreover, publishing to the DHT at regular intervals ensures that the IPNS name can be resolved even when there's high node churn (nodes coming and going.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, IPNS records need to be regularly (re-)published to the DHT. Moreover, publishing to the DHT at regular intervals ensures that the IPNS name can be resolved even when there's high node churn (nodes coming and going.)
```

> By default, Kubo will republish IPNS records to the DHT based on the [`Ipns.RepublishPeriod`] configuration which defaults to 4 hours. [Republishing](https://github.com/ipfs/go-namesys/blob/1bf7d3d9cbe8f988b232b92288b24d25add85a00/republisher/repub.go#L130-L167) involves two steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Kubo will republish IPNS records to the DHT based on the [`Ipns.RepublishPeriod`](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/blob/master/docs/config.md#ipnsrepublishperiod) configuration which defaults to 4 hours. [Republishing](https://github.com/ipfs/go-namesys/blob/1bf7d3d9cbe8f988b232b92288b24d25add85a00/republisher/repub.go#L130-L167) involves two steps:
```

> 1. Creating an updated IPNS record with the `validity` timestamp field updated (by default based on `Ipns.RecordLifetime`), and signing it with the private key. The `sequence` number will only be incremented if the content path changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Creating an updated IPNS record with the `validity` timestamp field updated (by default based on [`Ipns.RecordLifetime`](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/blob/master/docs/config.md#ipnsrecordlifetime)), and signing it with the private key. The `sequence` number will only be incremented if the content path changes.
```

#### IPNS over PubSub

IPNS over PubSub uses the [Libp2p PubSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/) to publish records and resolve names amongst **interested peers**.

This is achieved by deriving the PubSub topic name from the IPNS name so that each IPNS name has a unique topic.

Because PubSub doesn't have the notion of persistence (messages are ephemeral and dropped after propagation), IPNS over PubSub [adds a persistence layer](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/naming/pubsub.md#layering-persistence-onto-libp2p-pubsub) to ensure that IPNS records are always available to the network.

In Kubo, IPNS over PubSub is not enabled by default and can be enabled using the [`Ipns.UsePubsub`](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/blob/master/docs/config.md#ipnsusepubsub) configuration.

Initial operations, e.g. resolving or publishing an IPNS name for the first time can take time as they involve a roundtrip to the DHT (to lookup or publish provider records for the topic).

After the subscription to the topic is established, PubSub usually improves both publishing and resolving times of IPNS by relying on interested peers for both operations.

> It should be noted that there's an upper limit to the number of unique IPNS names you can resolve over PubSub, because for each name, a subscription is created which opens several network connections to mesh peers.

Reviewer: Mention how many digits this number is, ballpark range?

Author: Turns out this is set to the default configuration in libp2p-pubsub of 6 peers (and not modified by kubo). js-ipfs should be using the same configuration.

##### Publishing IPNS records over PubSub lifecycle

1. Create a record and sign it
2. Calculate PubSub topic name from IPNS name
3. Join the topic by querying the DHT for the topic's provider records
4. Publish the IPNS record to the topic
5. Whenever [a new peer joins the topic](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-pubsub-router/blob/292d99457d224853706c5e49f8ddc112740a856a/pubsub.go#L538-L560) (specifically your peer mesh), ask them for the record. If they respond with a newer record, update it locally and publish the updated record to the.
6. Periodically (by default every 10 minutes) rebroadcast the IPNS record,

> Steps 5 and 6 describe from a high level how IPNS record persistence is layered over PubSub by ensuring continuous propagation of the IPNS record in the face of node churn (nodes dropping in and out of the network).

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning IPNS over PubSub spec at the end of this section, in case someone is interested in low level  details:  https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/naming/pubsub.md#protocol
